Instructions:

Opening a file:

Open an image file in the 'File' tab by clicking 'Browse' or writing the
filename in the text field. Supported formats are .jpg, .png and .gif.



Image navigation: You can zoom the image by using the 'Zoom' slider or
the mouse wheel. Scroll vertically or horizontally by using the
respective sliders, arrow keys, or WASD keys. Note that if you have an
edit field active (i.e. you have clicked it and see a flashing pointer),
pressing any of the WASD keys will write text in that edit field, and if
you have a slider active (i.e. you have clicked the slider and nothing
else after that), pressing the arrow keys will move that slider. You can
deactivate an edit field or a slider by simply cliking somewhere else.



Selecting a starting point:

After opening a file, select a starting point by clicking 'Select' in the
'Parameters' tab and then clicking on the graph you want to digitize.
(Note that you can cancel this or any other selection action in the
program by clicking on the 'Select' button again.) Alternatively, you can
input the coordinates by hand by editing the 'X' and 'Y' fields.

The starting point is the point in the image where the algorithm starts
searching for the graph. This point doesn't need to be the actual
'starting point' (i.e. the leftmost point) of the graph. For best
results, the point should be selected in an area where there are no other
graphs, legends or other unwanted objects near the point, and the graph
around the point is relatively straight (i.e. its 2nd derivative is close
to 0). However, this is not a very strict requirement, usually almost any
point on the graph works quite well.



Digitizing the graph:

Upon clicking the 'Find graph' button, the algorithm automatically finds
and highlights the chosen graph on the original image. On the right a new
image will be displayed, which presents a plot of the data points in the
graph. The 'Find graph' button can also be used to refresh the picture
after adjusting the starting point or the parameters. However, note that
this will erase all user-made changes (see below) in the data points.



Parameters:

The graph digitized by pressing 'Find graph' will probably include some
errors caused by axes, legends and other objects in the picture. In these
cases adjusting the parameters can improve the results drastically.
However, finding the optimal values for the parameters may take several
tries, so simply deleting unwanted data points is usually faster

- Color Difference Tolerance:

The program assigns every pixel in the original image a normalized (i.e.
ranging from 0% to 100%) color difference value that is based on the
difference in color between the pixel and the starting point. After
finding the graph, the program will delete data points with a color
difference value higher than this parameter.

Setting this parameter to 100% will therefore keep all data points, 0%
will delete all data points that are no an exact color match, and values
between the extremes will delete the data points whose colors don't match
the graph color very well.


- Distance Difference Tolerance:

This parameter works in the same way as Color Difference Tolerance, but
instead of comparing pixel colors to the graph color, it compares the
y-value of the data point to the y-values of the data points next to it.
Setting this parameter to low will therefore remove single stray pixels
far from the main graph. (This will be improved in the future to remove
larger groups of unwanted pixels, since the current version doesn't do
much.)


 - Graph-Finding based on X % color, Y % position:

This parameter is used to determine how strongly the graph-finding
algorithm is based on pixel color compared to pixel position. Its usually
best to set this to favor color when digitizing colorful graphs and to
favor position when digitizing black-and-white graphs.



Scale:

The 'Scale' tab is used to tell the program the values on the axes of the
plot, since the program cannot detect them automatically. There are three
different ways to determine the axes, corresponding to the three radio
buttons in the 'Scale selection mode' panel.

- Select axes:

Press 'Select' and click first on the x-axis, then on the y-axis in the
image. Then write the x-coordinate of the first click and the
y-coordinate of the second click in the editable fields to the right.
This mode can only be used if both axes start at 0.

- Select two points:

Press the upper 'Select' button, click any point in the picture, and
input the x- and y-coordinates of the point. Then press the lower
'Select' button and repeat the process. Note that the two points selected
should be in different x- and y-coordinates.

- Select two points on each axis:

Press the upper 'Select' button and click on any two points on the
x-axis, then input the x-coordinates of both points. Press the lower
'Select' button and repeat the process for the y-axis.



Edit data points:

The data points hightlighted in the left image can be edited by hand.
Activate an editing mode by opening the 'Data' tab and clicking on the
'Delete data points', 'Overwrite data points' or 'Area deletion' buttons.
An editing mode may be cancelled by clicking on the corresponding button
again, or switching to another editing mode by clicking another button.

- Delete Data Points: Click on any data point in this mode to delete it.
Note that you must actually click on the pixel itself, the coloured
border doesn't count.

- Override Data Points Click on any point in the image in this mode to
create a new data point. If a data point already exists within the same
column in the image, it will be overridden.

- Area delete: Click on any point in the image in this mode to define one
corner of a rectangle. This point will not show in the picture, but the
cursor will change to indicate that the program has registered the click.
Click on a second point to delete all data points in the area of a
rectangle defined by the two clicks.



Save data:

Click on the 'Save to text file' button to save the data points to a text
file indicated in the 'File name' field in the 'Data' tab. If a file with
that name already exists, the old data will be overridden. If the file
doesn't exist, it will be created. The data will be saved in the format 1
2 2    4 3    8 and can be viewed as a plot by using the function
checkdata('filename.txt') on the MATLAB command line (replace 'filename'
with the actual file name).

Alternatively, running the program as [x, y] = graphdigitizer() will
return the x and y-values of the data points as MATLAB row vectors.